README.md, before:

# Autonomous Lawn Mower

An autonomous lawn mower system built for Raspberry Pi, featuring advanced navigation, obstacle detection, and safety features.

## Features

- Real-time obstacle detection using computer vision
- GPS-based navigation and boundary mapping
- Remote control via web interface
- Weather-aware scheduling
- Safety features and emergency stop
- Support for Google Coral Edge TPU acceleration
- Support for YOLOv8 object detection models
- Remote monitoring and control
- Multiple remote access options (DDNS, Cloudflare, NGROK)
- Automatic startup on boot via systemd service
- Hardware watchdog for system reliability
- Emergency stop button support

## Environment Variables

See [`.env.example`](.env.example:1) for required environment variables, including:

- `USE_SIMULATION`
- `LOG_LEVEL`
- `CONFIG_DIR`
- `IMU_SERIAL_PORT`

## Module Overview

Overview of key modules:

- `MainController`: Coordinates all subsystems and state transitions
- `NavigationController`: Handles path planning and movement control
- `ObstacleDetector`: Processes sensor data and obstacle avoidance
- `HardwareManager`: Provides hardware abstraction for sensors and actuators

Architecture diagram placeholder: see [docs/system_architecture.md](docs/system_architecture.md)

## Developer Tooling

- Black (code formatting)
- MyPy (static type checking)
- Flake8 (linting)

Refer to coverage targets in [docs/test_coverage.md](docs/test_coverage.md)

## Prerequisites

- Raspberry Pi 4B (4GB RAM or better recommended)
- Python 3.9 or newer
- Raspberry Pi OS (Bookworm or newer)
- Camera module (v2 or v3 recommended)
- Various sensors (see Hardware Setup)
- Emergency stop button (normally closed)
- Optional: Google Coral USB Accelerator

## Initial Setup

### 1. System Dependencies

```bash
# Update system packages
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get upgrade

# Install required system packages
sudo apt-get install -y \
    python3-pip \
    python3-dev \
    python3-setuptools \
    python3-wheel \
    i2c-tools \
    git
```

### 2. Clone Repository

```bash
git clone https://github.com/acredsfan/autonomous_mower.git
cd autonomous_mower
```

### 3. Create Log Directory and Set Permissions

Before running the installation script or service, you must create the log directory and set the correct permissions:

```bash
# Create log directory
sudo mkdir -p /var/log/autonomous-mower

# Set ownership to pi user
sudo chown -R pi:pi /var/log/autonomous-mower

# Set correct permissions
sudo chmod 755 /var/log/autonomous-mower
```

These steps are required only once during initial setup. The service will use this directory for all logging operations.

### 4. Installation

```bash
# Make the script executable
chmod +x install_requirements.sh

# Run the installation script with sudo
sudo ./install_requirements.sh
```

The installation script will:

- Install required system packages
- Install required Python packages system-wide
- Set up the systemd service
- Configure hardware interfaces
- Set up the watchdog timer
- Optionally install YOLOv8 models for improved object detection
- Optionally set up Google Coral TPU if available

#### Note on Python Package Installation

This project uses system-wide Python package installation with the `--break-system-packages` flag to bypass PEP 668 restrictions. This is because:

1. The mower requires direct access to hardware interfaces (GPIO, I2C, etc.)
2. It's a dedicated device running only the mower software
3. System-wide installation ensures proper permissions and access to hardware resources
4. It simplifies service integration and maintenance

The installation uses the `--break-system-packages` flag to bypass PEP 668 restrictions, which is appropriate for this dedicated device. This approach has been tested and documented in our issues tracking system.

You may see the message "Defaulting to user installation because normal site-packages is not writeable" during installation. This is normal and expected on modern Linux systems due to PEP 668. Our installation script handles this by:

1. Using `--break-system-packages` to ensure system-wide installation
2. Installing packages in the correct location for hardware access
3. Setting proper permissions for the installed packages

## Running the Mower

### Starting the Service

```bash
# Start the service
sudo systemctl start autonomous-mower

# Enable service to start on boot
sudo systemctl enable autonomous-mower

# Check service status
sudo systemctl status autonomous-mower
```

### Monitoring Logs

The mower logs are stored in `/var/log/autonomous-mower/`:

```bash
# View service log
tail -f /var/log/autonomous-mower/service.log

# View error log
tail -f /var/log/autonomous-mower/error.log

# View application log
tail -f /var/log/autonomous-mower/mower.log
```

Logs are automatically rotated when they reach 1MB, with 5 backup files kept.

## Hardware Setup

### Required Hardware Connections

1. **Camera Module**

   - Connect to CSI port
   - Enable camera in raspi-config
   - Test with: `raspistill -v -o test.jpg`

2. **GPS Module**

   - Connect to UART pins (GPIO 14/15)
   - Enable serial in raspi-config
   - Test with: `gpsmon /dev/ttyAMA0`

3. **IMU Sensor**

   - Connect to UART pins (GPIO 8/10, i.e., TXD0/RXD0 or as configured)
   - Enable serial/UART in raspi-config
   - Test with: `python3 -m mower.hardware.imu` (shows live IMU data if connected)
   - Ensure your `.env` or environment variables specify the correct UART port (eg., `IMU_SERIAL_PORT=/dev/ttyAMA2`)

4. **Emergency Stop Button** (Optional)

   - Connect between GPIO7 and GND
   - Button should be normally closed (NC)
   - Test with: `gpio read 7`
   - Can be disabled in configuration if not physically installed

5. **Motor Controllers**
   - Connect to appropriate GPIO pins
   - Configure in .env file
   - Test with manual control in UI

### Object Detection Setup

#### YOLOv8 Setup (Recommended)

1. During installation, choose to install YOLOv8 models when prompted
2. Alternatively, run the setup script manually:
   ```bash
   python3 scripts/setup_yolov8.py --model yolov8n
   ```
3. Configure detection in .env file:
   ```
   USE_YOLOV8=True
   YOLOV8_MODEL_PATH=/path/to/yolov8n.tflite
   ```
4. Test with:
   ```bash
   python3 -m mower.obstacle_detection.yolov8_detector
   ```

#### Coral TPU Setup (Optional)

1. Connect Coral USB Accelerator
2. Install Coral runtime during installation
3. Verify detection:
   ```bash
   lsusb | grep "1a6e:089a"
   ```
4. Test with:
   ```bash
   python3 -c "import tflite_runtime.interpreter as tflite; print('Coral TPU detected')"
   ```

## YOLOv8 Model Download and Conversion (Required for Obstacle Detection)

**Note:** Due to TensorFlow's lack of support for export on Raspberry Pi OS Bookworm (Python 3.11+), you must export YOLOv8 models to TFLite format on a supported PC (Linux/Windows, Python 3.9 or 3.10), then copy them to your Pi.

### Steps:

1. **Export the YOLOv8 model to TFLite format on a supported PC:**

   - Use a Linux or Windows PC (x86_64) with Python 3.9 or 3.10.
   - Install the required packages:
     ```sh
     pip install ultralytics tensorflow==2.14.* flatbuffers==23.*
     ```
   - Download the YOLOv8 PyTorch model (e.g., yolov8n.pt) from Ultralytics.
   - Export to TFLite:
     ```sh
     yolo export model=yolov8n.pt format=tflite imgsz=640 nms=False
     ```
   - The exported file will be named `yolov8n_float32.tflite` (or similar).

2. **Copy the exported `.tflite` model and label map to your Raspberry Pi:**

   - Place the `.tflite` file in the `models/` directory of your mower project.
   - Place the label map (e.g., `imagenet_labels.txt` or `coco_labels.txt`) in the same directory.

3. **Update your `.env` file:**

   - Add or update these lines:
     ```
     # YOLOv8 configuration
     YOLOV8_MODEL_PATH=models/yolov8n_float32.tflite
     LABEL_MAP_PATH=models/coco_labels.txt
     USE_YOLOV8=True
     ```

4. **Restart the mower software.**
   - The obstacle detector will automatically use the YOLOv8 TFLite model if configured.

### Exporting YOLOv8 Models Using Google Colab (Recommended for Most Users)

If you do not have access to a local PC with Python 3.9/3.10, you can use Google Colab to export YOLOv8 models to TFLite format:

1. **Open a new notebook at [Google Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/)**
2. **Paste and run the following code cells:**

```python
# Install dependencies
!pip install ultralytics tensorflow==2.14.* flatbuffers==23.*

# Download YOLOv8n PyTorch model
from ultralytics import YOLO
model = YOLO('yolov8n.pt')

# Export to TFLite (FP32)
model.export(format='tflite', imgsz=640, nms=False)
```

3. **Download the exported `.tflite` file:**

   - After running the export, the file (e.g., `yolov8n_float32.tflite`) will appear in the Colab file browser (left sidebar).
   - Right-click and select "Download" to save it to your computer.

4. **Download the label map:**

   - You can create a `coco_labels.txt` file in Colab with:
     `python
     COCO_LABELS = """person
bicycle
car
motorcycle
... (full list as in docs) ...
toothbrush""".splitlines()
with open('coco_labels.txt', 'w') as f:
    for label in COCO_LABELS:
        f.write(label + '\n')
     `
   - Download `coco_labels.txt` from the file browser.

5. **Copy both files to your Raspberry Pi and follow the setup steps above.**

#### Troubleshooting

- If you see errors about TensorFlow or FlatBuffers versions, ensure you did the export on a supported PC, not on the Pi.
- If the model or label map is missing, download or export them as described above.
- For more details, see the project documentation or ask for help in the project forums.

## Configuration

The `.env` file contains all configuration settings. Key sections include:

- Google Maps integration
- GPS and IMU settings
- Camera and obstacle detection
- Remote access configuration
- Hardware settings
- Path planning parameters
- Maintenance settings

See `.env.example` for detailed descriptions of each setting.

## Safety Features

1. **Emergency Stop**

   - Available as both:
     - Physical button (optional hardware component)
     - Web UI button (always available)
   - System can operate with or without a physical button
   - Configure in settings: `safety.use_physical_emergency_stop`
   - Sensor override controls for testing
   - Battery monitoring and low-battery alerts
   - Hardware watchdog for system reliability

### Emergency Stop Configuration

The autonomous mower supports two modes of emergency stop functionality:

1. **With Physical Button (Default)**:

   - Connect a normally closed (NC) button between GPIO7 and GND
   - Set `safety.use_physical_emergency_stop` to `true` in config
   - When pressed or if wire is disconnected, the mower stops immediately
   - Provides a hardware failsafe independent of software

2. **Software-Only Mode**:
   - Set `safety.use_physical_emergency_stop` to `false` in config
   - Emergency stop functionality available only through web interface
   - No physical button required
   - Suitable when hardware button is not available or desired

During installation, you'll be asked whether to configure a physical emergency stop button.
You can change this setting later by editing the configuration file.

2. **Safety Guidelines**
   - Pre-Operation Checks
     - Verify emergency stop functionality
     - Check battery level
     - Ensure all sensors are working
     - Verify boundary settings
   - During Operation
     - Monitor system status
     - Keep emergency stop accessible
     - Watch for obstacle detection
     - Monitor battery levels
   - Maintenance
     - Regular blade inspection
     - Battery maintenance
     - Sensor cleaning
     - Software updates

## Troubleshooting

Common issues and their solutions:

### Service Won't Start

1. Check log directory permissions:

```bash
ls -l /var/log/autonomous-mower
```

If permissions are wrong, run:

```bash
sudo chown -R pi:pi /var/log/autonomous-mower
sudo chmod 755 /var/log/autonomous-mower
```

2. Check service logs:

```bash
sudo journalctl -u autonomous-mower -n 50 --no-pager
```

3. Verify Python environment:

```bash
python3 -m mower.diagnostics.hardware_test --non-interactive --verbose
```

### Camera Issues

1. Check camera connection and enable:

```bash
vcgencmd get_camera
libcamera-hello -t 5000
```

2. Verify camera devices:

```bash
ls /dev/video*
```

3. Check camera permissions:

```bash
groups | grep video
sudo usermod -aG video pi  # If 'video' group missing
```

### Object Detection Issues

1. Check YOLOv8 model exists:

```bash
ls -l src/mower/obstacle_detection/models/yolov8n.tflite
```

2. Reinstall YOLOv8 model if missing:

```bash
python3 scripts/setup_yolov8.py --model yolov8n
```

3. Check environment variables:

```bash
grep YOLOV8 .env
```

## Contributing

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch
3. Make your changes
4. Run tests and style checks
5. Submit a pull request

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the LICENSE file for details.

## Acknowledgments

- Google Coral team for Edge TPU support
- Ultralytics for the YOLOv8 models
- Raspberry Pi Foundation for hardware platform
- OpenCV community for computer vision tools

Commit message:

Add COCO label map download to installation script; update README with usage instructions

README.md, after:

# Autonomous Lawn Mower

An autonomous lawn mower system built for Raspberry Pi, featuring advanced navigation, obstacle detection, and safety features.

## Features

- Real-time obstacle detection using computer vision
- GPS-based navigation and boundary mapping
- Remote control via web interface
- Weather-aware scheduling
- Safety features and emergency stop
- Support for Google Coral Edge TPU acceleration
- Support for YOLOv8 object detection models
- Remote monitoring and control
- Multiple remote access options (DDNS, Cloudflare, NGROK)
- Automatic startup on boot via systemd service
- Hardware watchdog for system reliability
- Emergency stop button support

## Environment Variables

See [`.env.example`](.env.example:1) for required environment variables, including:

- `USE_SIMULATION`
- `LOG_LEVEL`
- `CONFIG_DIR`
- `IMU_SERIAL_PORT`

## Module Overview

Overview of key modules:

- `MainController`: Coordinates all subsystems and state transitions
- `NavigationController`: Handles path planning and movement control
- `ObstacleDetector`: Processes sensor data and obstacle avoidance
- `HardwareManager`: Provides hardware abstraction for sensors and actuators

Architecture diagram placeholder: see [docs/system_architecture.md](docs/system_architecture.md)

## Developer Tooling

- Black (code formatting)
- MyPy (static type checking)
- Flake8 (linting)

Refer to coverage targets in [docs/test_coverage.md](docs/test_coverage.md)

## Prerequisites

- Raspberry Pi 4B (4GB RAM or better recommended)
- Python 3.9 or newer
- Raspberry Pi OS (Bookworm or newer)
- Camera module (v2 or v3 recommended)
- Various sensors (see Hardware Setup)
- Emergency stop button (normally closed)
- Optional: Google Coral USB Accelerator

## Initial Setup

### 1. System Dependencies

```bash
# Update system packages
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get upgrade

# Install required system packages
sudo apt-get install -y \
    python3-pip \
    python3-dev \
    python3-setuptools \
    python3-wheel \
    i2c-tools \
    git
```

### 2. Clone Repository

```bash
git clone https://github.com/acredsfan/autonomous_mower.git
cd autonomous_mower
```

### 3. Create Log Directory and Set Permissions

Before running the installation script or service, you must create the log directory and set the correct permissions:

```bash
# Create log directory
sudo mkdir -p /var/log/autonomous-mower

# Set ownership to pi user
sudo chown -R pi:pi /var/log/autonomous-mower

# Set correct permissions
sudo chmod 755 /var/log/autonomous-mower
```

These steps are required only once during initial setup. The service will use this directory for all logging operations.

### 4. Installation

```bash
# Make the script executable
chmod +x install_requirements.sh

# Run the installation script with sudo
sudo ./install_requirements.sh
```

The installation script will:

- Install required system packages
- Install required Python packages system-wide
- Set up the systemd service
- Configure hardware interfaces
- Set up the watchdog timer
- Optionally install YOLOv8 models for improved object detection
- Optionally set up Google Coral TPU if available

#### Note on Python Package Installation

This project uses system-wide Python package installation with the `--break-system-packages` flag to bypass PEP 668 restrictions. This is because:

1. The mower requires direct access to hardware interfaces (GPIO, I2C, etc.)
2. It's a dedicated device running only the mower software
3. System-wide installation ensures proper permissions and access to hardware resources
4. It simplifies service integration and maintenance

The installation uses the `--break-system-packages` flag to bypass PEP 668 restrictions, which is appropriate for this dedicated device. This approach has been tested and documented in our issues tracking system.

You may see the message "Defaulting to user installation because normal site-packages is not writeable" during installation. This is normal and expected on modern Linux systems due to PEP 668. Our installation script handles this by:

1. Using `--break-system-packages` to ensure system-wide installation
2. Installing packages in the correct location for hardware access
3. Setting proper permissions for the installed packages

## Running the Mower

### Starting the Service

```bash
# Start the service
sudo systemctl start autonomous-mower

# Enable service to start on boot
sudo systemctl enable autonomous-mower

# Check service status
sudo systemctl status autonomous-mower
```

### Monitoring Logs

The mower logs are stored in `/var/log/autonomous-mower/`:

```bash
# View service log
tail -f /var/log/autonomous-mower/service.log

# View error log
tail -f /var/log/autonomous-mower/error.log

# View application log
tail -f /var/log/autonomous-mower/mower.log
```

Logs are automatically rotated when they reach 1MB, with 5 backup files kept.

## Hardware Setup

### Required Hardware Connections

1. **Camera Module**

   - Connect to CSI port
   - Enable camera in raspi-config
   - Test with: `raspistill -v -o test.jpg`

2. **GPS Module**

   - Connect to UART pins (GPIO 14/15)
   - Enable serial in raspi-config
   - Test with: `gpsmon /dev/ttyAMA0`

3. **IMU Sensor**

   - Connect to UART pins (GPIO 8/10, i.e., TXD0/RXD0 or as configured)
   - Enable serial/UART in raspi-config
   - Test with: `python3 -m mower.hardware.imu` (shows live IMU data if connected)
   - Ensure your `.env` or environment variables specify the correct UART port (eg., `IMU_SERIAL_PORT=/dev/ttyAMA2`)

4. **Emergency Stop Button** (Optional)

   - Connect between GPIO7 and GND
   - Button should be normally closed (NC)
   - Test with: `gpio read 7`
   - Can be disabled in configuration if not physically installed

5. **Motor Controllers**
   - Connect to appropriate GPIO pins
   - Configure in .env file
   - Test with manual control in UI

### Object Detection Setup

#### YOLOv8 Setup (Recommended)

1. During installation, choose to install YOLOv8 models when prompted
2. Alternatively, run the setup script manually:
   ```bash
   python3 scripts/setup_yolov8.py --model yolov8n
   ```
3. Configure detection in .env file:
   ```
   USE_YOLOV8=True
   YOLOV8_MODEL_PATH=/path/to/yolov8n.tflite
   ```
4. Test with:
   ```bash
   python3 -m mower.obstacle_detection.yolov8_detector
   ```

#### Coral TPU Setup (Optional)

1. Connect Coral USB Accelerator
2. Install Coral runtime during installation
3. Verify detection:
   ```bash
   lsusb | grep "1a6e:089a"
   ```
4. Test with:
   ```bash
   python3 -c "import tflite_runtime.interpreter as tflite; print('Coral TPU detected')"
   ```

## YOLOv8 Model Download and Conversion (Required for Obstacle Detection)

**Note:** Due to TensorFlow's lack of support for export on Raspberry Pi OS Bookworm (Python 3.11+), you must export YOLOv8 models to TFLite format on a supported PC (Linux/Windows, Python 3.9 or 3.10), then copy them to your Pi.

### Steps:

1. **Export the YOLOv8 model to TFLite format on a supported PC:**

   - Use a Linux or Windows PC (x86_64) with Python 3.9 or 3.10.
   - Install the required packages:
     ```sh
     pip install ultralytics tensorflow==2.14.* flatbuffers==23.*
     ```
   - Download the YOLOv8 PyTorch model (e.g., yolov8n.pt) from Ultralytics.
   - Export to TFLite:
     ```sh
     yolo export model=yolov8n.pt format=tflite imgsz=640 nms=False
     ```
   - The exported file will be named `yolov8n_float32.tflite` (or similar).

2. **Copy the exported `.tflite` model and label map to your Raspberry Pi:**

   - Place the `.tflite` file in the `models/` directory of your mower project.
   - Place the label map (e.g., `imagenet_labels.txt` or `coco_labels.txt`) in the same directory.

3. **Update your `.env` file:**

   - Add or update these lines:
     ```
     # YOLOv8 configuration
     YOLOV8_MODEL_PATH=models/yolov8n_float32.tflite
     LABEL_MAP_PATH=models/coco_labels.txt
     USE_YOLOV8=True
     ```

4. **Restart the mower software.**
   - The obstacle detector will automatically use the YOLOv8 TFLite model if configured.

### About the COCO Label Map (`coco_labels.txt`)

The YOLOv8 TFLite model requires a label map file that lists the names of all object classes the model can detect. For standard COCO-trained models, this file is usually called `coco_labels.txt` or `coco_labels.txt`.

- **What is it?**
  - A plain text file, one label per line, matching the order of classes in the model.
  - Example first lines:
    ```
    person
    bicycle
    car
    motorcycle
    ...
    toothbrush
    ```
- **Where do I get it?**
  - You can download it from the official Ultralytics or Google Coral repositories:
    - [COCO labels from Google Coral](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/google-coral/test_data/master/coco_labels.txt)
  - Or create it manually in a text editor using the full COCO class list (see above).
- **How do I use it?**
  - Place `coco_labels.txt` in your `models/` directory next to your `.tflite` model.
  - Update your `.env` file:
    ```
    LABEL_MAP_PATH=models/coco_labels.txt
    ```
- **Why is it needed?**
  - The label map allows the mower software to display human-readable class names for detected objects (e.g., "person", "car") instead of just class numbers.

### Exporting YOLOv8 Models Using Google Colab (Recommended for Most Users)

If you do not have access to a local PC with Python 3.9/3.10, you can use Google Colab to export YOLOv8 models to TFLite format:

1. **Open a new notebook at [Google Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/)**
2. **Paste and run the following code cells:**

```python
# Install dependencies
!pip install ultralytics tensorflow==2.14.* flatbuffers==23.*

# Download YOLOv8n PyTorch model
from ultralytics import YOLO
model = YOLO('yolov8n.pt')

# Export to TFLite (FP32)
model.export(format='tflite', imgsz=640, nms=False)
```

3. **Download the exported `.tflite` file:**

   - After running the export, the file (e.g., `yolov8n_float32.tflite`) will appear in the Colab file browser (left sidebar).
   - Right-click and select "Download" to save it to your computer.

4. **Download the label map:**

   - You can create a `coco_labels.txt` file in Colab with:
     `python
     COCO_LABELS = """person
bicycle
car
motorcycle
... (full list as in docs) ...
toothbrush""".splitlines()
with open('coco_labels.txt', 'w') as f:
    for label in COCO_LABELS:
        f.write(label + '\n')
     `
   - Download `coco_labels.txt` from the file browser.

5. **Copy both files to your Raspberry Pi and follow the setup steps above.**

#### Troubleshooting

- If you see errors about TensorFlow or FlatBuffers versions, ensure you did the export on a supported PC, not on the Pi.
- If the model or label map is missing, download or export them as described above.
- For more details, see the project documentation or ask for help in the project forums.

## Configuration

The `.env` file contains all configuration settings. Key sections include:

- Google Maps integration
- GPS and IMU settings
- Camera and obstacle detection
- Remote access configuration
- Hardware settings
- Path planning parameters
- Maintenance settings

See `.env.example` for detailed descriptions of each setting.

## Safety Features

1. **Emergency Stop**

   - Available as both:
     - Physical button (optional hardware component)
     - Web UI button (always available)
   - System can operate with or without a physical button
   - Configure in settings: `safety.use_physical_emergency_stop`
   - Sensor override controls for testing
   - Battery monitoring and low-battery alerts
   - Hardware watchdog for system reliability

### Emergency Stop Configuration

The autonomous mower supports two modes of emergency stop functionality:

1. **With Physical Button (Default)**:

   - Connect a normally closed (NC) button between GPIO7 and GND
   - Set `safety.use_physical_emergency_stop` to `true` in config
   - When pressed or if wire is disconnected, the mower stops immediately
   - Provides a hardware failsafe independent of software

2. **Software-Only Mode**:
   - Set `safety.use_physical_emergency_stop` to `false` in config
   - Emergency stop functionality available only through web interface
   - No physical button required
   - Suitable when hardware button is not available or desired

During installation, you'll be asked whether to configure a physical emergency stop button.
You can change this setting later by editing the configuration file.

2. **Safety Guidelines**
   - Pre-Operation Checks
     - Verify emergency stop functionality
     - Check battery level
     - Ensure all sensors are working
     - Verify boundary settings
   - During Operation
     - Monitor system status
     - Keep emergency stop accessible
     - Watch for obstacle detection
     - Monitor battery levels
   - Maintenance
     - Regular blade inspection
     - Battery maintenance
     - Sensor cleaning
     - Software updates

## Troubleshooting

Common issues and their solutions:

### Service Won't Start

1. Check log directory permissions:

```bash
ls -l /var/log/autonomous-mower
```

If permissions are wrong, run:

```bash
sudo chown -R pi:pi /var/log/autonomous-mower
sudo chmod 755 /var/log/autonomous-mower
```

2. Check service logs:

```bash
sudo journalctl -u autonomous-mower -n 50 --no-pager
```

3. Verify Python environment:

```bash
python3 -m mower.diagnostics.hardware_test --non-interactive --verbose
```

### Camera Issues

1. Check camera connection and enable:

```bash
vcgencmd get_camera
libcamera-hello -t 5000
```

2. Verify camera devices:

```bash
ls /dev/video*
```

3. Check camera permissions:

```bash
groups | grep video
sudo usermod -aG video pi  # If 'video' group missing
```

### Object Detection Issues

1. Check YOLOv8 model exists:

```bash
ls -l src/mower/obstacle_detection/models/yolov8n.tflite
```

2. Reinstall YOLOv8 model if missing:

```bash
python3 scripts/setup_yolov8.py --model yolov8n
```

3. Check environment variables:

```bash
grep YOLOV8 .env
```

## Contributing

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch
3. Make your changes
4. Run tests and style checks
5. Submit a pull request

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the LICENSE file for details.

## Acknowledgments

- Google Coral team for Edge TPU support
- Ultralytics for the YOLOv8 models
- Raspberry Pi Foundation for hardware platform
- OpenCV community for computer vision tools
